Suzy’s Journey Towards Healing
I am delighted to be offering Raw Food, Radiant Life education – a dream come true! In my
many years as an occupational therapist, it has been heart-wrenching witnessing the
tremendous suffering of people trying to manage with serious, frequently disabling and/or life-
limiting illness.
Over, and over again, I have journeyed with them through illness and many times into death. It
has been a labor of love, and, much as I have wanted to give my patients all that I could, I have
very frequently felt that what I had to offer was paltry in comparison to the enormity of their
challenges.
The Quest for More Effective Healing
In my desire to offer more, I have diligently sought and wonderfully found new ways to help
through complementary methods. That quest began with prayer, continued into
studying/teaching Reiki, then massage, CranioSacral therapy, Healing Touch, ARCH/Infinite
Oneness energy work, aromatherapy, guided imagery, yoga, sound healing, and raw, vegan
nutrition.
My Personal Health Challenge
In 2000, I was diagnosed with an autoimmune disease, termed &quot;undifferentiated connective
tissue disease,&quot; and the disease process was marked by substantial pain and inflammation.
There were many times I had great difficulty even turning over in bed or rising from a chair. The
joints in my hands were becoming deformed. I experienced profound fatigue.
About three years prior to my diagnosis, after being trained in Reiki hands-on energy healing, I
had prayed asking what to eat to allow the Reiki energy to flow most easily; information quickly
came my way from numerous sources regarding a raw, vegan diet. I knew that was the answer
to my prayer. However, I did not adopt the diet. I chose to convert to a lacto-ovo vegetarian
diet, but I was a very unhealthy vegetarian – lots of pizza, pasta, macaroni and cheese and
peanut butter sandwiches, but very few vegetables.
Eventually, the pain and disability caused by the autoimmune illness outweighed the challenges
of diet and lifestyle change, and my diet evolved into a raw vegan diet, with an earnest
commitment in 2007, as one of my two New Year’s resolutions. The other resolution was to
practice more yoga, which I knew I would not do unless I had to, because of the level of pain
and fatigue and because it was a major process for me to even get up from the floor. So, I

enrolled in yoga teacher training because I knew it would make me go. By the end of the five
months of training, I was able to teach a basic yoga class and was able to decrease my anti-
inflammatory medication. At graduation, I spontaneously began to jog towards my water
bottle, across the yoga room. I was astounded, because I had not jogged in years!
In my many years as an occupational therapist, I had never seen anyone recover from a severe
autoimmune illness, and I wanted to help people experience recovery the way I did. However, I
felt that I did not know enough to teach a raw vegan lifestyle to others.
I found the answer to my deep desire for more training in a master’s level program, Spiritual
Nutrition Mastery, developed by Gabriel Cousens, MD, at the Tree of Life Rejuvenation Center.
The Transformation
Following Dr. Cousens&#39; program, I recovered – off all medication, now able to do whatever I
want to do – hike, jog, perform deep tissue massage... and with the energy to share it all with
you. I no longer feel that what I have to offer is paltry; it is amazing! I long to share it with you.
&quot;If you are dealing with an illness – autoimmune disease, cancer, heart disease, diabetes,
essentially any other ailment, or if you just want to feel more alive, vibrant, and tuned in to your
spiritual nature, I hope you will connect with me.&quot;
How I Can Help You
I invite you to connect with me through:
 Raw Food, Radiant Life! health coaching to transform your health
 Swedish or Thai Massage for deep relaxation and release of muscular tension
 CranioSacral therapy/SomatoEmotional Release and/or ARCH/Infinite Oneness energy
work for profound relaxation, trauma release, and Divine spiritual connection
Your journey to wellness doesn&#39;t have to be walked alone. Let me share with you the tools and
knowledge that transformed my life and can transform yours too.


Comprehensive Holistic Health Services
I offer a wide range of holistic health services, including occupational therapy,
massage therapy, yoga instruction, ARCH/Infinite Oneness energy work, and raw
vegan lifestyle Instruction.
With over 40 years of experience as an occupational therapist and extensive
training in complementary modalities, I am dedicated to helping you achieve
optimal physical, emotional, and spiritual well-being.
I believe that health is not just the absence of disease, but a high level of physical,
mental, and social well-being.

Let me help you achieve it!

About Me

I began my healing studies in a conventional way as an occupational
therapist in 1985 and within a decade became interested in and then
immersed in complementary methods, pursuing various training
programs. I am a registered massage therapist, Reiki/ARCH
practitioner/teacher, and a certified yoga teacher.
In 2018, I completed a master&#39;s level Spiritual Nutrition program through
renowned holistic physician, Gabriel Cousens, MD, becoming a Spiritual
Nutrition Counselor and a certified raw vegan health coach. Following a
raw vegan diet, I recovered from a severe autoimmune disease and am
also, very thankfully, a cancer survivor for over a decade.
I am passionate about all things healing and empowering others to live as
healthy and happy lives as possible! If you would like to read more about
my healing journey, you can do so here. (blog post)