Plant-Based Recipes

The American Institute for Cancer Research recommends a plant-based diet, incorporating a minimum of 5 servings of fruits/vegetables daily. This can be challenging to accomplish; hopefully, these recipes will help! 

Always wash fruits and vegetables thoroughly. Many of these recipes are not cooked; there are good reasons to incorporate into your diet foods that are closer to their natural state, as cooking can decrease the nutritional value.

Some of these recipes call for soaked nuts or seeds. Soaking nuts and seeds increases their nutritional value, as it begins the germination process. You can add 1 T of food-grade hydrogen peroxide to the soak water to make sure they are extra clean.  The recipes should be refrigerated and eaten within 3 days.

Dietary needs vary; always follow the guidance provided by a registered dietician and/or your physician to include recipes that are suited to your particular needs.

All recipes are used with permission from the authors. They are coded as follows, to help with your meal planning:

 = low glycemic
 = fairly low glycemic
 = higher glycemic
 = high protein/high calorie

 
---------------------------BREAKFAST

 Nut Milk 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, RMT, CHC
Makes ~ 3 cups

3 T nut butter (pecan, almond or walnut)
3 c water

Blend until smooth in a high-speed blender. Can be flavored with any of the following: coconut oil, raw carob powder, raw cacao powder, raw vanilla powder, chia seeds, salt, cardamom, cinnamon, mesquite pod meal, chai spice blend, ginger, nutmeg, mint, stevia…  

  Chocolate Chia Porridge  
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Makes ~ 5 cups, or 5 servings.  

3 T nut butter 
4.5 c water
1⁄4 t raw vanilla powder (optional) 
3 T raw, vegan chocolate protein powder (such as Garden of Life or rejuvjuice.com) 
3 dropperfuls vanilla stevia
1-2 T maple syrup (optional)
2 drops peppermint essential oil (optional)
1 pinch salt (optional)
¾ cups chia seeds  
raw berries or banana (optional)

Blend all ingredients except chia seeds and fruit. Pour into a medium ¬to large bowl. Add chia seeds and stir. The mixture will become porridge/pudding like in ~ 10 minutes.  Top with berries or banana, if you’d like. Call it porridge if you have it for breakfast, and pudding, if you have it for dessert.  I keep mine in cup‐sized mason jars in the fridge. 

 
 Chocolate-Mint Granola 
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 6 Cups/6 Servings 
Equipment needed: Food processor 

1 cup shredded or sliced dried coconut 
1 cup raw sunflower seeds, soaked first, optimally 4 hours
1 cup raw walnuts, soaked first, optimally 1-2 hours
1 1/2 tsp vanilla 
1/2 tsp sea salt
2-3 heaping tbsp raw cacao powder 
1-2 few drops of mint essential oil or extract 
1/4 tsp green stevia powder or extract 
3 dates
2 1/2 cups raw almonds, preferably soaked 12 hours
1-3 tbsp maple syrup, agave, or honey 

Consider dividing recipe in half or sharing it. This recipe uses mint essential oil (or extract), however, feel free to use other essential oils (or extracts) such as orange, or don’t use any at all and stick with chocolate. 

Process the shredded coconut in a food processor until the oils begin to come out of the coconut (about 30 seconds). Add the sunflower seeds, and process until the seeds are broken down into a nutty flour. Add the walnuts, vanilla, sea salt, cacao, mint essential oil or extract, and stevia, and process until the walnuts are completely broken down into a nutty flour. Finally, add the dates and process until they are broken into small pieces. Pour the nut mixture into a large bowl. Chop the almonds in a food processor; add to the nut mixture and mix well. Add the maple syrup and stir. The granola should clump together into nutty clusters. Keep refrigerated.

 
 Cinnamon Chia Porridge 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
4 servings/4 cups
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

3.5 T nut butter  
3 c water
1.5 t pumpkin pie spice
1.5 t cinnamon
1⁄2 t salt
1‐2 dropperfuls vanilla stevia
3/4 c chia seeds
1⁄4 c raw shredded coconut (optional)
1⁄4 t raw vanilla powder (optional)  

Blend all ingredients except chia seeds and coconut* (if used). Pour into a med ¬to large bowl. Add the chia seeds and coconut* and stir. The mixture will become porridge/pudding like. Call it porridge if you have it for breakfast, and pudding, if you have it for dessert. I keep mine in cup‐sized mason jars in the fridge. 

Per 1 serving:
Calories: 272
Protein: 10.17

  Mocha Latte 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC

1 ½ T any flavor Teccino herbal coffee, brewed 
1 ½ scoops chocolate Rejuv raw, vegan protein powder (Rejuvjuice.com)
1 dropperful vanilla, coconut, or chocolate stevia
1 rounded t green powder, such as Moringa (optional)

Brew the coffee, allow it to cool to lukewarm (115 degrees, or less), and add the remaining ingredients. Stir, and enjoy warm. For a cold beverage, you can also put it all in a mason jar, shake, and refrigerate.

Per recipe:
Calories 211
Protein 28g


 
 Quick Succulent Granola
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 5 Cups/5 Servings
Equipment needed: Food processor, dehydrator (optional)

1 cup raw sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours
1 cup raw walnuts, preferably soaked 4 hours
1 1/2 tsp vanilla 
1/2 tsp sea salt 
1 1/2 tsp cinnamon, ground 
3 heavy pinches nutmeg, ground
1/4 tsp green stevia powder 
3 dates 
2 1/2 cups raw slivered almonds
1 tbsp honey

In a food processor, process the sunflower seeds, walnuts, vanilla, sea salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, and stevia, and process until the walnuts are completely broken down. Add the dates and process until they are broken into small pieces. Pour the nut mixture into a large bowl. Sprinkle the slivered almonds onto the nut mixture and mix. Pour on the honey and stir. Granola should clump together into nutty clusters. Eat as is or pour the granola onto a dehydrator tray (no lining needed) and dehydrate for 24 hours (at 105 degrees). When stored in an airtight container, the granola will keep for 1 week. If you would like to store the granola longer, keep it in the refrigerator or freezer.
Tips to reduce the cost: Try to buy all of the dry ingredients from bulk bins.  is way you can buy the amounts you need.

 
--------------------------SMOOTHIES 

Apple Spice Smoothie
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

1 cup water
7 oz spinach, spring mix, or 50/50 blend
1 green apple, quartered
1 lime, juice of
1 t pumpkin pie spice
3 T hemp seeds
2 dropperfuls orange stevia

Add ingredients to the blender in the order listed and blend until smooth.

   Banana Nut Smoothie 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

2 cups water
2 frozen bananas 
4 Tbsp raw nut butter 
1 dropperful vanilla stevia, or to taste
1/2 tsp cinnamon
1-2 scoops vanilla or chocolate raw, vegan protein powder
Sprinkle with nutmeg or cinnamon (optional)

Blend the water, nut butter, and protein powder; then add the other ingredients and blend.

  Berry Smoothie
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

1.5 cups water
2 scoops Rejuv raw, vegan vanilla protein powder (Rejuvjuice.com)
1 cup berries, any type
½ banana
2 c spinach or other greens
	
Add ingredients to the blender in the order listed and blend until smooth.

 Blueberry Arugula Smoothie 
(adapted from original recipe by Ritamarie Loscalzo, MS, DC, CCN, DACBN, 	drritamarie.com)
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

5-oz container arugula 
3⁄4 c water
1 c frozen blueberries 
1 T cinnamon
¼ t cardamom
juice of 1 lemon 
1 squirt vanilla stevia
3 T hemp seeds 

Fill the blender, beginning with the water and the arugula, and blend until smooth. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 283
Protein: 16 g

 Cherry Ginger Kale Smoothie 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

3⁄4 c water
1 bunch green kale, torn into big pieces 
1 c frozen cherries 
1 squirt plain stevia
1⁄2” fresh ginger root 
3 T hemp seeds 

Fill the blender, beginning with the water and the kale, and blend until smooth. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 178
Protein: 15 g

 
 Cherry Vanilla Kale Smoothie 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

3⁄4 c water
1 bunch red kale, torn into big pieces 
1 c frozen cherries 
1 squirt vanilla stevia 
3 T hemp seeds 
Fill the blender, beginning with the water and the kale, and blend until smooth. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 333
Protein: 17 g


   Rainbow Smoothie
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

1.5 cups water
1 mandarin orange, peeled
1 cup mixed berries
1/2 banana, frozen, if you’d like
1 T almond butter
1 cup kale or spinach
2 scoops raw, vegan vanilla protein powder 

Directions: Add ingredients to the blender in the order listed and blend until smooth.


 
 Raspberry Lemon Smoothie 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

7 oz spring mix 
3⁄4 c water
1 c frozen raspberries 
juice of 1 lemon 
1 squirt plain or orange stevia 
3 T hemp seeds 

Fill the blender, beginning with the water and the greens, and blend until smooth. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 307
Protein: 14 g

 Strawberry Basil Smoothie 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

7 oz spring mix 
3⁄4 c water
1 c frozen strawberries 
juice of 1 lemon 
1 squirt plain or orange stevia
1 sprig fresh basil, or substitute with 1 t dried basil 
3 T hemp seeds 
Fill the blender, beginning with the water and the greens, and blend until smooth. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 320
Protein: 13 g

 
 Strawberry Lime Smoothie 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

3⁄4 c water
7 oz 50/50 spinach and spring mix blend 
1 c frozen strawberries 
juice of 2 limes 
1 squirt plain or orange stevia
3 T hemp seeds 
Fill the blender, beginning with the water and the greens, and blend until smooth. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 287
Protein: 15 g

 Strawberry Mint Smoothie 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

7 oz 50/50 spinach and spring mix 
3⁄4 c water
1 c frozen strawberries 
juice of 1 lemon 
1 squirt plain, orange, or peppermint stevia
1 sprig fresh mint (or substitute peppermint stevia) 
3 T hemp seeds 
Fill the blender, beginning with the water and the greens, and blend until smooth. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 281
Protein: 15

 
   Tropical Smoothie 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

1.5 c water
1 T shredded coconut
2 scoops raw, vegan vanilla protein powder
1/4 c macadamia nuts
½ c frozen pineapple
½ c frozen mango
1 banana, frozen, if you’d like

Blend the water, coconut, protein and nuts. Add the fruit and blend again.


   Walnut Smoothie
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

2 c water
1/2 c walnuts, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
1.5 scoops Rejuv raw, vegan vanilla protein powder (Rejuvjuice.com)
2 c spinach
1 banana, frozen, if you’d like
1/2 avocado
1/2 green apple
1 t coconut oil
1 t pumpkin spice

Directions: Blend the water, protein powder and nuts and then add additional ingredients and blend. 

 
---------------------------JUICES

  Green Lemonade 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: juicer

1 bunch kale or other leafy greens 
 1 cucumber 
4 stalks celery 
1⁄2” piece fresh ginger root 
1 lemon with peel 
2 squirts stevia (grape, vanilla, orange, apricot, or combo) 

Per recipe:
Calories: 90
Protein: 6 g


 One Love Juice 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: juicer

1 cucumber 
1 bunch Romaine 
4 stalks celery 
2 broccoli stems 
juice of 1 lime 
1 squirt stevia (orange, grape, vanilla, peppermint, strawberry...) 

Per recipe:
Calories: 239
Protein: 18 g


 
 Jugo Fabuloso! 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Equipment needed: juicer

1 cucumber 
4 carrots 
4 stalks celery 
1 lemon 
1⁄2” piece fresh ginger root 
1 handful cilantro 
6 large collard green leaves 

Per recipe:
Calories: 379
Protein: 28 g


 
-----------------------ENTREES 

 Broccoli ‘n’ Cheez 
(adapted from original recipe - Tree of Life Rejuvenation Center, Gabriel Cousens, MD) Serves 2. 
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

2 bunches broccoli - florets only ~5 cups (Can use stems for juicing.) 
Salt to taste 
Cheez sauce from Mac ‘n’ Cheez recipe below (1/2 of recipe)

Remove florets from broccoli stems. Sprinkle florets with Himalayan or Celtic sea salt, and massage salt into florets. Pour sauce over broccoli. Can substitute one head of cauliflower florets for the broccoli florets.


 Mac ‘n’ Cheez 
(adapted from original recipe - Tree of Life Rejuvenation Center, Gabriel Cousens, MD) 
Serves 2. 
Equipment needed: high-speed blender

SAUCE
2 c Brazil nuts, unsoaked
1 c tomatoes
1 red bell pepper
½ c lemon juice 
1-2 t salt
½ t turmeric
¼ c fresh basil 

NOODLES
2 large zucchini, 2 large yellow squash, or 1 of each 
1/8 t salt

Blend all ingredients except squash until smooth. (You can save half of cheez sauce for Broccoli ‘n’ Cheez recipe.) Serve remaining half over julienned or spiralized zucchini and/or squash noodles, after massaging about 1/8 t salt into “noodles” to soften them.

 

 Pad Thai  
(adapted from original recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

SAUCE
¾ c shredded coconut flakes 
1 c water
½ c macadamia nuts, unsoaked 
1 clove garlic 
1/8 c lime juice 
1 t apple cider vinegar  
¼ t Celtic salt
½ t ginger
1/8 t cayenne
¼ t black pepper
 
NOODLES
3-4 zucchini and/or yellow squash, spiralized or very thinly sliced 

Process all ingredients except noodles in a blender until smooth. Mix with spiralized zucchini and/or yellow squash noodles. Garnish with coarsely chopped vegetables or dried/fresh cilantro, if desired.


 Tastes Like Refried Beans Pate
(adapted from original recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)
Serves 4-6.

2 c sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours
1 c sundried tomatoes, soaked
2 T, or to taste, Mexican seasoning
1 T red raw miso
¼ t, or to taste, cayenne
¼ t, or to taste, salt

Process all ingredients in a food processor with the “S” blade until smooth and creamy; add a little water for consistency.

 
	
 
 Simplified Savory Spicy Pecan Loaf 
(adapted from original recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

1 c pecans, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
2 T lemon juice 
2 T water
1 T olive oil 
1⁄2 t Celtic salt
2 t cumin
3⁄4 t poultry seasoning 
1⁄4 t turmeric 

Place all in food processor and process until well blended. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 814
Protein: 18 g


  Stuffed Peppers 
(adapted from original recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

2 T olive oil 
1⁄2 c walnuts, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
1 T raisins (or use a few drops plain or grape stevia instead) 
 1 t cinnamon 
1⁄2 t allspice
Celtic salt and pepper to taste
 1⁄2 c parsley 
Process all ingredients except bell pepper in food processor, until mealy.  Serve a dollop atop a bell pepper half. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 580
Protein: 8

 
 Summer Pizza 
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 8+ Slices - 4 servings
Equipment needed: High-speed blender or food processor 

CRUST
8 leaves of Lacinato kale (or collards) 

CHEESE
1 ½ cup Brazil nuts, unsoaked
1 ½  lemons, juice of 
1 pinch cayenne powder
7-12 tbsp water
1 piece sun-dried tomato
1 tsp Italian spices, dried
1 tsp balsamic vinegar 
sea salt to taste 
1/4 cup flaxseeds 

TOPPING
2 red tomatoes 
1 c cherry tomatoes 
1 small handful of fresh basil 
1 spring onion 
4 olives, sliced 
sea salt to taste
1 avocado 

Soak the sun-dried tomato in water for an hour, or more. CRUST: Wash the kale and dry. CHEESE: Blend the Brazil nuts in a strong blender or food processor, adding water one tablespoon at a time to help them blend. Be careful not to add too much water. Blend until very smooth. Add the remaining cheese ingredients and blend until smooth and creamy. You may need to add 1-3 tablespoons of water to help it blend. If you accidently add too much water, add a sun-dried tomato to thicken the cheese. TOPPING: Chop the tomatoes and slice the cherry tomatoes in half; place in a medium-sized bowl. Add the spring onion and olives (optional). Mince the basil and add. Salt to taste and mix.
To assemble the pizza, spread the cheese on top of a kale leaf. Top with 2 slices of avocado and 2 tbsp of tomato topping. Sprinkle flaxseeds on top.

Per serving (4): 
Calories 517
Protein 11 g
 Cabbage and Bon Bon Dipping Sauce 
(from Tree of Life Rejuvenation Center, Gabriel Cousens, MD) 

1 head cabbage 
1⁄4 t salt
6 T almond butter 
3 T miso 
1 T olive oil 
2 T apple cider vinegar 
1 T ginger 
1⁄2 c cilantro 
1⁄2 c parsley 
1-2 t dried chili pepper 
1⁄4-1/2 c water
stevia to taste 

Slice red or green cabbage, fairly thinly; then massage salt into cabbage. Blend remaining ingredients well in food processor or blender. Serve sauce over cabbage. Makes 2 large servings. 

Per serving (2):
Calories: 560
Protein: 22 g

 
 Sister’s Sunflower Power Pate 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC, Cheryl Beesley, author Landscaping with Edible Plants in Texas

2 c sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours
1/2 c lemon juice 
1/2 c sesame seeds, unsoaked (or 4T tahini)
1⁄2 t dill
1⁄2 t salt
12 drops stevia
1 c parsley 
1⁄2 t mustard powder
1⁄2 shallot 
2 cloves garlic 
sprig fresh basil (optional)
1T olive oil 
1/8 t cayenne 
Blend the garlic, shallot, and sesame seeds in a food processor. Add the remaining ingredients and process until slightly chunky.

Per serving (2):
Calories: 535
Protein: 17 g  

 
 Sweet Italian Herb Spaghetti 
(Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 2 1/2 cups/1-2 Servings

2 large zucchini 
4 medium red tomatoes 
3/4 cup sun-dried tomatoes 
1/2 tsp fresh oregano
1/4 tsp fresh thyme
1/4 cup raw walnuts, whole, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
1 clove garlic 
sea salt to taste
1/2 tsp balsamic vinegar (or substitute apple cider vinegar) 
1 handful fresh basil 

Prepare the zucchini noodles using a mandoline, spiralizer, or julienne peeler, or paring knife. Place the noodles in a large bowl, add the sea salt, and mix. Blend 2 tomatoes, 1/2 cup of the sun- dried tomatoes, oregano, thyme, walnuts, garlic, and vinegar until smooth. Pour the sauce over the noodles. Chop the basil and remaining tomatoes; add to the noodles. Serve. 
Per recipe:
Calories: 454
Protein: 23 g

 
 
 Neatballs 
(adapted from recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

1 c almonds, preferably soaked 12 hours, or overnight
½ c walnuts, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
¼ c olive oil
¼ c leeks
2 celery stalks
1 T sage
1 T marjoram
1 T thyme
1 t Celtic salt

Homogenize nuts with oil. Finely chop and stir in leeks, celery, herbs, and salt. Roll into 1.5 inch balls and dehydrate for 2-3 hours at 145 degrees, or eat without dehydrating. Serve with Sweet Italian Herb Spaghetti.

 Walnut Pate  
(Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

2 c walnuts, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
1/2 c leeks
2 T olive oil
1 T Italian seasoning
½ - 1 t Celtic salt
Process all ingredients in a food processor until smooth and creamy; add a little water for consistency.
  

Per recipe: 
Calories: 1308
Protein: 30 g

 
-------------------------------SALADS  (FOR SIDE OR ENTRÉE)

   Autumn Salad
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
3 servings

SALAD
½ cup pecan halves, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
6 cups (~2 bunches) chopped kale (any variety)
2 medium Granny Smith apples, cut into chunks

DRESSING
3 tablespoons olive oil
1½ tablespoons apple cider vinegar 
1 tablespoon smooth Dijon mustard
1½ teaspoons honey (can substitute Bee Free honey, available at Amazon)
Sea salt and freshly ground pepper, to taste

In a large bowl, combine salad ingredients. In a small bowl, combine dressing ingredients. Toss together just before eating. 

Per serving
Calories: 396
Protein: 7g

 Avocado Salad with Rosemary 
(Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

2 c avocado, diced (about 2 avocados) 
1 c tomatoes 
1 c sunflower sprouts 
1 T rosemary
1 ½ T lemon juice 
1 ½ T garlic, minced 
½-1 t Celtic salt
Salad greens, any variety (optional)

Combine all ingredients in a mixing bowl; leave a slightly chunky consistency. Serve over salad greens, if desired.
 
Per recipe, without salad greens:
Calories: 574
Protein: 5 g

  Good Ole’ Collards and Sweet Peppers 
(Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 2 Servings
 
4 medium collard green leaves 
1/4 tsp sea salt
1 tsp apple cider vinegar
juice from 1/4 lemon
1 medium sweet bell pepper 
14 brazil nuts
1/4 tsp raw honey (optional)

Place the sliced collards into a large bowl, and add the salt, vinegar, and lemon juice and mix well. Grind 10 brazil nuts into a flour using a coffee grinder, food processor, or high-speed blender. Pour the nuts our onto the greens and mix until the greens are well coated. Add on the honey and mix well. Grind the remaining brazil nuts into a flour. Before serving, sprinkle the nut flour on top of the greens! Enjoy!

 Kale Salad 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Makes 2-3 large servings.

1 large bunch kale (~4c) 
1⁄4 t salt
1⁄4 t onion powder 
1 avocado 
1 tomato, cut into chunks 
3⁄4 c sprouts of any variety 
chili pepper flakes 

Tear or cut kale into bite-size pieces. (You can strip the leafy part from the stem by pinching the base of the stem, just under the leaf, and dragging pinched fingers up to the top of the leaf.) Massage salt and onion powder into kale. Slice avocado and massage avocado into kale. Add tomato and sprouts. Add chili pepper flakes sparingly, to taste. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 283
Protein:  8 g

 Festive Salad 
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Makes a big salad ~ 3 large servings

SALAD
6 cups (~2 bunches) curly green kale (or other greens) – massage with a little salt -1/16 	to 1/8 t)
1 Granny Smith apple
1 pomegranate, seeds
1 pear
juice of 1 lemon or lime 
~4 drops orange stevia 
honey walnuts (top with)

DRESSING
Whisk together in a small bowl:
Juice of one orange
2 t raw honey (can substitute Bee Raw honey)
dash cinnamon
1-2 t apple cider vinegar
1.5 T raw nut butter (or substitute walnuts, soaked ~ 4 hrs and blended).

HONEY WALNUTS (or substitute Nate’s Raw Harvest
1/2 cup walnuts (or substitute pecans), soaked
1 t Honey 
~ 4 drops orange stevia
dash cinnamon
dash pumpkin pie spice (or garam masala and omit the pepper)
pinch salt
pinch pepper

Seed the pomegranate (underwater, in a bowl of water, works best to avoid juice spurting) and chop the apple and pear - place all in a medium bowl and stir in lemon juice. Add ~4 drops orange stevia. DRESSING: Whisk together the dressing ingredients in a small bowl. HONEY WALNUTS: Prepare the honey walnuts by first soaking the walnuts ~ 2 hours, drain, pat dry. Whisk together the other ingredients and then stir together with the walnuts. You can dehydrate the walnuts at 118 degrees, or less (to preserve the enzymes), or use them as is, without dehydrating them. Just before serving, toss the greens with the fruit and dressing and top with the honey walnuts.

Per serving
Calories: 378
Protein: 10
 Kale and Peaches 
(Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 1 Large Serving 

5-6 leaves dinosaur or Lacinto kale 
sprinkle of sea salt (to taste)
1 tbsp balsamic vinegar
1 small or 1/2 medium sweet pepper 
1/3 medium cucumber
1 small handful of cherry tomatoes 
1 medium peach
2-3 tbsp hemp seeds
2 tbsp sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours
1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 

Layer the kale leaves on top of each other, roll them into a burrito, and cut them into thin, 1/4-inch slices. Place the sliced kale into a salad bowl and massage the salt and vinegar into the kale. Set aside. Chop the sweet pepper, slice the cucumbers, and cut the cherry tomatoes in half. Add to the kale and mix well. Chop the peach into slices or cubes. Add the peaches, hemp seeds and sunflower seeds and oil and mix well. Enjoy! 

 Kale Salad Ole 
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)

1 bunch lacinato kale 
sea salt (to taste)
2 tbsp apple cider vinegar 
2 tsp garlic powder
1 tsp coriander
1 tsp cumin
¼ cup Brazil nuts, unsoaked, chopped or blended in Vitamix with ¼ t salt 
3 T hemp seeds 
1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil

Layer the kale leaves on top of each other, roll them into a burrito, and cut them into thin 1/4-inch slices. Place the sliced kale into a salad bowl and massage the salt and vinegar into the kale. Add the remaining ingredients to the kale except for the oil and mix well. Add the oil to the kale and mix well. Enjoy!

Per recipe:
Calories 548
Protein 21
 Mango, Tomato, Avocado Chop Bowl 
(Brandi Rollins, Raw Food on a Budget)
Makes 1 large serving

1 medium ripe tomato, chopped into ½” cubes
1 medium mango, chopped into ½” cubes
1 medium avocado, chopped into ½” cubes
6-10 fresh mint leaves, torn up (or basil)
pinch sea salt
¼- ½ teaspoon cinnamon
optional: ½ teaspoon Balsamic Vinegar
 
Stir gently. Allow flavors to mingle for 15-30 minutes. Or not.

Calories: 528
Protein: 21g


 Lemon Green Yum Kale Salad
(Brandi Rollins – Raw food on a Budget)  
Makes 4 Servings 

1 bunch Lacinato kale
sea salt to taste
2 tbsp apple cider vinegar 
2 tsp garlic powder
1 tsp coriander, ground
1 tsp cumin, ground
3 tbsp nutritional yeast
5 tbsp hemp seeds
2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 

Layer the kale leaves on top of each other, roll them into a burrito, and cut them into thin, 1/4-inch slices. Place the sliced kale into a salad bowl and massage the 3 salt and vinegar into the kale. Add the remaining ingredients on to the kale except for the oil and mix well. Add the oil to the kale and mix well. Enjoy! 

Nutrition Information Per Serving (based on 2,000 calorie daily intake): calories 214, protein 11g, total fat 14g, carbohydrate 16g, dietary ber 5g, total sugars 0g, calcium 30%, iron 36%, sodium 16%, potassium 25%, zinc 10%, vitamin A 83%, vitamin E 14%, thiamin 255%, riboflavin 222%, niacin 114%, vitamin B6 197%, folate 9%, vitamin B12 49%, vitamin C 291% 

 Rainbow Salad 
(adapted from recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, by Gabriel Cousens, MD) 
Makes 2 servings.

1 tomato, diced 
1 carrot, cut in rounds 
1 yellow pepper, diced 
6 large kale leaves, finely chopped 
1 avocado, diced 
3 T hemp seeds 
1 T olive oil
Pinch Celtic or Himalayan sea salt

Massage kale leaves and salt. Combine salad with other ingredients.

Per recipe: 
Calories: 620
Protein: 20 g

 Summer Bowl 
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 1.5 Servings 
 
1 zucchini, large 
1 garlic clove 
1 small handful of basil 
2 T balsamic vinegar 
1 T olive oil 
1 medium tomato (or 1 handful of cherry tomatoes) 
1/2 medium spring onion 
1 small or 1/2 medium sweet pepper 
3 T hemp seeds
¼ c almonds, preferably soaked 12 hours, chopped
1 cup of blueberries 
sea salt to taste 

Equipment needed: Julienne peeler or Spiralizer. Julienne peelers are less expensive (~$8), can be found in any kitchen store or online, and are easy to use and clean. Spiralizers are also great if you want to create noodles out of hard squashes, such as Butternut, in addition to soft squashes like zucchini. You can find one at Amazon.com for ~ $25.; mine is a Joyce Chen.

Slice the zucchini into noodles using your Julienne peeler or Spiralizer. If you use a Julienne peeler, do not slice the center of the zucchini... it is too mushy. Mince the garlic and basil leaves and add them to the noodles. Now, add the balsamic vinegar to the noodles and stir well. Chop your tomato(es), onion, and pepper (remove core). Add them to the noodles and stir. Add the hemp seeds, almonds, and olive oil. Stir. Sprinkle blueberries on top and stir. That’s it! Enjoy! 

Per recipe:
Calories 619
Protein 23g

 Simple Italian Salad 
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 1 large serving
 
3 cups Romaine lettuce
1 cup cherry tomatoes (halved)
2 T fresh basil 
1/2 medium avocado
sprinkle of dried Italian herbs
sprinkle of balsamic vinegar 
3 tbsp hemp seeds (optional) 
sprinkle of olive oil (optional) 
sea salt to taste

Wash and prepare the lettuce, placing it in a large bowl. Chop the tomatoes and add to the salad. Mince the fresh herbs and add to the salad. Add the 4 dried herbs as well.
Add the avocado, hemp seeds, balsamic vinegar, and salt, and mix well.
Lastly, pour the olive oil onto the salad and mix. Serve!

Per recipe
Calories: 446
Protein: 17 g
 
 Summer Celebration Salad 
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 1 very large serving 
 
SALAD 
6 cups of spring mix or other favorite greens 
1/3 medium cucumber 
1 small handful of basil 
1 cup strawberries 
¼ c raw sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours 
¼ c almonds, sliced
DRESSING 
1-2 tbsp lemon juice (~1/2 lemon) 
1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
sea salt to taste 

Set the greens into a large mixing bowl. Thinly slice the cucumber. Mince the basil. Add to the greens. DRESSING: Mix all of the ingredients in a small cup or bowl. You can store the dressing in an airtight container in the refrigerator for up to 6 days. Immediately before eating, pour the dressing over the salad and stir. Sprinkle the sunflower seeds and almonds over the greens and gently stir. Enjoy!
 
Substitute fruits and veggies with produce that is in season and local to your area. You can substitute the lemon juice with balsamic or apple cider vinegar.

Per recipe:
Calories 628
Protein 16g

 Tomato/Cucumber/Onion Chop 
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Serves 1.
 
1 medium tomato, chopped 
1 small cucumber, cubed
1 thin slice onion, diced
¼ teaspoon sea salt

 Toss veggies together and sprinkle with salt.

Calories: 48
Protein: 2g
 Waldorf Salad

SALAD
3-4 celery ribs, chopped
1/3 cup chopped celeriac (celery root, optional)
1/3 cup chopped tart apple 
1/3 -1/2 cup chopped walnuts (soaked in water 4 hours, dehydrated if desired)
1/8 t freshly ground black pepper
1 bunch Romaine lettuce
1 t olive oil

DRESSING
1/2 cup cashew nuts (soaked in water 2 hours)
1/4 cup purified water
1 Tbsp raw apple cider vinegar
1/3 cup virgin olive oil
1/2 tsp mustard powder or 1 tsp mustard
1/2 tsp Celtic salt

Method:

Mix the chopped celery, celeriac, apple and walnuts in a large bowl. Using a food processor or a blender, blend cashews, water, vinegar, olive oil, mustard and salt. (Add additional salt, mustard, oil or vinegar, to taste.) Pour the dressing over the chopped ingredients and mix well. Add freshly ground pepper. Serve over Romaine dressed with olive oil.

--------------------------SOUPS 

   Basic Green Soup Recipe 
(Ritamarie Loscalzo, MS, DC, CCN, DACBN, drritamarie.com)

2 - 4 cups greens
1 - 2 cups water
1/4 cup lemon or lime juice
1 piece of fruit (optional)
seasonings
herbs
other vegetables such as carrot, red bell pepper, tomato, cucumber

Directions:
Blend all together and adjust to taste.

Note: All soups can be made creamier by adding your choice of fat (these are optional) including choices such as:
1 avocado
2 tablespoons nut butter
coconut butter
tahini
 1/4 cup soaked nuts or seeds

 Creamy Miso Soup (Phase 1.5) 
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 2 Cups/1 Very Large Serving 
Equipment needed: Blender and veggie/potato peeler 

¼  cup raw sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours
¼ cup Brazil nuts, unsoaked 
1 tbsp chickpea miso
1 tbsp rice vinegar 
1 small clove of garlic 
1-2 tbsp coconut aminos (thrivemarket.com) or salt to taste
1 ½  cups water 
1 tsp extra virgin olive oil 
1 small handful basil leaves 
1/3 medium cucumber
2 medium carrots
2 medium celery stalks 
½ c cherry tomatoes 

Mince a small handful of basil and add to the soup. Slice the cucumber into thin coins, and then cut each coin in half. Add to the soup. Using a potato peeler, peel the carrots and celery to create long noodles. Add to the soup. You can also create noodles out of bok choy, thinly sliced nori seaweed, dulse seaweed and/or cucumber. 

Preparation:
Soak the sunflower seeds in water for ~ 4 hours.
Blend the soaked sunflower seeds, the Brazil nuts, miso, vinegar, garlic, coconut aminos, and water until liquefied (20 or more seconds). Add the olive oil and blend for a few seconds. Pour the miso soup into a large serving bowl. Cut the cherry tomatoes in half or into quarters, and then add to the soup. 

Tips to reduce cost: Try using whatever veggies you have on hand. 

Per recipe:
Calories 684
Protein 16g

 Cream of Tomato Soup 
(adapted from original recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

4 tomatoes 
3 stalks celery 
1 c water 
3⁄4 c walnuts, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
2 T lemon juice 
1 t basil
1 t oregano 
1t salt 
1⁄4 t black pepper
1⁄4 t cinnamon 

Blend all in a high-speed blender until smooth and creamy. If you use a Vitamix, blend until slightly warm - tepid. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 587
Protein: 18 g


 
 Spinach Soup  
(adapted from original recipe by Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)
Makes 2 Cups/2 Servings 

1 cup spinach, fresh
1/2 cup raw Brazil nuts, unsoaked 
1/4 cup sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours
1 cup water
2 tbsp lemon juice (~1/2 lemon)
1/4 tsp cayenne powder
sea salt to taste
1 tbsp sweetener of your choice 

Soak the sunflower seeds in water overnight.Blend all of the ingredients until smooth. 


-----------------------BREADS

 Zucchini Bread 
(from Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD) 

2 c pecans, preferably soaked 1-2 hours 
~6 drops stevia
1 c zucchini 
1 1⁄4 c golden flax seeds 
2 t cinnamon
1⁄2 to 1 t salt
1⁄4 t raw vanilla powder, or 1⁄2 vanilla bean 

Grind flax seeds in a dry blender container or a coffee grinder. Process zucchini, stevia, and vanilla in a blender until smooth; add a little water, as needed, to blend. Process pecans in a food processor until meal-like. Add cinnamon and salt and combine. Form into 1-2 loafs and slice into 1/4” slices. If you have a dehydrator, dehydrate at 145 degrees for 2-3 hours, and then 115 degrees for 2 hours, or until desired moisture is obtained. If not, serve as is. To serve, spread with coconut oil or coconut butter. Coconut butter may need to be softened by placing a small container of coconut butter in a bowl of warm water, or in the dehydrator for a few minutes. 

Per 1/8 recipe:
Calories: 314
Protein: 7 g

DIPS AND APPETIZERS

 Guacamole 
(adapted from original recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

1 clove garlic, minced 
2 avocados, cut into chunks 
1 tomato, diced 
1⁄4 cup fresh cilantro, finely chopped, or substitute 1 1⁄2 t dried cilantro 
2 T lime juice 
1⁄2 t cumin
1/4 t black pepper
1⁄4 t Celtic salt 

Stir together. For a faster preparation and a creamy guacamole, chop garlic in food processor; then add other ingredients except tomato and blend. Add diced tomatoes and stir. 

Per recipe:
Calories: 677
Protein: 9

 Hummus 
(from Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

2 c almonds, preferably soaked 12 hours
1 c sesame seeds, unsoaked
5 T lemon juice 
1 clove garlic 
1 C water
2 T olive oil 
1 T cumin
½ t to 1 1/2 t Celtic salt
1 t ground black pepper

Process almonds in food processor until finely chopped.  Slowly add ½ c water and mix for 2-3 minutes, until creamy.  In a dry blender container, grind dry sesame seeds to a powder, and then mix with ½ c water and the remaining ingredients, until the mixture is smooth.  Add more water if necessary.  Add creamed almond mixture and process for 1-2 minutes until the mixture is blended.   Sprinkle parsley on top and serve.
 
 
Per recipe:
Calories: 2728
Protein: 86 g

 Sour Cream  
(adapted from Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

1.5 c Brazil nuts 
1 cup water (adjust according to desired consistency)
½ c sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours 
1 T lemon or lime juice 
1/2 t Celtic salt
1 c water
 
In a high-speed blender, process all ingredients until smooth. Serve with sliced veggies, such as cucumber, carrots, celery, or bell pepper.
 
Per recipe: 
Calories: 2062
Protein:  15 g



 
---------------------SNACKS


 Chocolate Milk
(Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com) 
Makes 4.5 cups
Equipment needed: Blender • Nut milk bag, cheese cloth, or juicer

1 cup raw almonds, preferably soaked 12 hours
1/4 cup sunflower seeds, preferably soaked 4 hours
3 3/4 cups fresh water
2-3 tbsp sweetener of choice 
1 medium banana
1/4 tsp vanilla
2-3 heaping tbsp raw cacao powder

In a bowl or large jar, soak the almonds and sunflower seeds in 3 cups of water for at least 8 hours or overnight. Pour the soaked nuts and seeds into a blender and add 3/4 cups of fresh water. Blend until almonds and sunflower seeds are completely broken down into a pulp. Let the mixture sit in the blender for 5 to 10 minutes
Strain and squeeze the milk into a large bowl using a nut milk bag, cheesecloth, or juicer. Rinse the blender. Pour the nut milk back into the blender and add your sweetener, banana, vanilla, and cacao powder. Blender until the milk is completely smooth. Enjoy!

 Easy Sprouted Happy Trail Mix
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC
Makes 9 cups, ~ 18 servings

2 cups Nates Mixed Nuts (Whole Foods or natesrawharvest.com)
2 cups sprouted almonds (available online)
2 cups sprouted pumpkin seeds (available online)
1 cup raisins
1 cup dried cherries
1 cup chocolate pieces with shell or 1 cup gogi berries

Add all to a large bowl and mix.


 
  Happy Treats
(adapted from original recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)
Makes 11 small treats

½ c raw almond butter 
¼ cup hemp seeds 
¼ cup carob powder 
1 t vanilla powder
1 dropperful vanilla stevia
½ t cinnamon
½ t nutmeg
¼ t ground ginger
1 small pinch salt
1 t raw honey (optional) 

Combine all ingredients in a large mixing bowl. Form into balls and roll in carob powder or hemp seeds.

Per serving 
Calories: 99 with honey, 97 without honey
Protein: 4g


 
  Vanilla Fruit
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC

1 cup fruit: cherries, peaches, blueberries, sliced plums, sliced nectarines…
3 drops vanilla stevia, or to taste

Stir together gently.

  Cinnamon Fruit
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC

1 cup fruit: banana, apple, peach…cut in chunks or sliced
sprinkle of cinnamon
3 drops of vanilla stevia, or to taste

Stir fruit gently with stevia and sprinkle with stevia.

  Nut Butter Fruit or Veggies
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC

3 T raw nut butter (almond, pecan…)
¼ t cinnamon or garam masala
4 drops stevia or to taste 
3 celery stalks, 2 carrots, or 1 apple, sliced

Cut celery stalks into 3 pieces each, slice carrots into sticks, or slice apples into 8 pieces. Stir together remaining ingredients and spread on veggies/fruit.

 
-------------------------DESSERTS

 Banana ice cream
Chocolate Ice Cream with Chocolate Shell 
(Brandi Rollins, rawfoodsonabudget.com)

Makes 1.5 Cups/ 2 Servings 
Equipment needed: Food processor, high-speed blender, or masticating juicer. 

CHOCOLATE SHELL 
2 tbsp raw cacao powder
2 tbsp coconut oil
1 tbsp liquid sweetener of choice 
1/4 tsp vanilla 

ICE CREAM 
4 bananas, previously frozen
1 heaping tbsp raw cacao powder 
(Optional) 1 tbsp raw agave or maple syrup 
Also feel free to add more raw cacao powder to the ice cream and chocolate shell batter for more of a chocolate flavor. 

To prevent yourself from eating this dessert all at once, portion it out into 2 small mason jars (or regular small jars) and store them the freezer or fridge. And when you are ready to eat the ice cream, take a portion out of the freezer and let it thaw for 10-20 minutes. 

Preparation 
Peel and freeze the 3 bananas for at least 24 hours. 

CHOCOLATE SHELLYou will want to make sure that the coconut oil is in liquid form. If your coconut oil is solid, warm it by sitting out in the sun, on a warm stove, or in the dehydrator. Mix all the ingredients in a small bowl very well. Set aside. Chop the frozen the bananas. Place all the ingredients in your food processor or high-speed blender, and blend until creamy. Scoop the ice cream out and place in a small bowl. Spoon the chocolate shell batter over the ice cream. Enjoy! 


 
 Carob Mint Cake 
(adapted from original recipe in Rainbow Green, Live Food Cuisine, Gabriel Cousens, MD)

1 c almonds, preferably soaked 12 hours
1 c raw carob powder
½ c walnuts, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
½ c coconut water (or substitute ¼ c raw coconut flakes plus ¼ c water)
¼ c chia seeds
1 t raw vanilla powder
4 drops mint essential oil 
2 dropperfuls vanilla stevia
I T coconut oil
1 t fresh ginger (optional)

Process the ginger in a food processor with the “S” blade; then add the nuts and process again.  Add the remaining ingredients and mix well.  Shape into a cake. Frost with agave nectar combined with raw cacao and/or carob powder. Top with raspberries.

  Raw Apple or Peach Crisp 
(Inspired by Whole Foods recipe)
Serves 8

Ingredients: 
4 Honeycrisp or green apples (or 6 peaches), cored and chopped
1/4 cup fresh-squeezed orange juice
½ dropperful orange stevia
3/4 cup pecan halves, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
3/4 cup hazelnuts, preferably soaked 1-2 hours
1/2 cup dates or raisins
1.5 t pumpkin spice

Place apples or peaches in an 8-inch square baking dish or 2-quart casserole dish. Toss with orange juice and orange stevia. In a food processor, pulse chop pecans, hazelnuts, raisins or dates, and pumpkin spice. Spoon the nut mixture over the apple mixture.
 

 
 Raw Chocolates, low glycemic
Suzy Edmonson, LOT, SNC, CHC

6 T raw cacao powder 
6 T coconut oil or cacao butter, melted (in dehydrator) 
4 dropperfuls vanilla stevia
Small pinch Celtic or Himalayan
12 whole almonds (optional) 
coconut flakes (optional)

You can make different varieties of these chocolates by adding any of the following:

~1/4 t raw vanilla powder (optional)
1 T honey (optional – minimal use, phase 2)
1/8 t dried lavender (optional)
dash cinnamon (optional)
sprinkling of hemp seeds (optional)

Stir all together and drop 1 T of mixture in each section or a silicone candy mold. Allow to cool a few minutes and drop a whole almond in the center (vertically); then sprinkle with coconut flakes. The almond and coconut flakes will sink if the chocolate is too warm, and just imbed slightly if just the right temperature. Either way, they taste delicious! Freeze for ~15 minutes. Take out of candy mold and enjoy!
 
---------------------BEAN RECIPES

   Beans and Southern Peas
Cheryl Beesley, author Landscaping with Edible Plants in Texas

1 bag dry beans or southern peas*
1 large onion
2 T olive oil
1-2 fresh jalapenos cut in quarters (optional)
1 large can diced tomatoes (or substitute 2 cups fresh tomatoes)
1 T stock base (I like to use ‘Better Than Bouillon’ Brand)
1 T pepper
2 t salt
1 T cumin (for beans not peas)

Rinse beans/peas a few times and then add enough water to cover by about an inch or two (more water will make the final product thinner). Let the beans/peas soak for an hour or two, and then bring to a boil. Turn heat down to a simmer and add canned tomatoes, jalapenos, salt and pepper and bouillon. Sauté the onion over medium heat until translucent. Add to the pot. Cover and let simmer for about an hour over low heat. Stir occasionally and make sure the beans/peas do not dry out. Season to taste. Season the peas with hot pepper vinegar** if you like it spicy.

*Bean varieties for this recipe include pinto, black (turtle) and kidney varieties, southern pea varieties include black-eye and crowder.

** Hot pepper vinegar is made by bringing apple cider vinegar to a low simmer and pouring over hot peppers in mason jars. The more peppers the hotter!
 
  Lentil Soup    
Cheryl Beesley, author Landscaping with Edible Plants in Texas

1 bag dry lentils
1 large onion
1 large can diced tomatoes
1 T stock base (I like to use ‘Better Than Bouillon’ brand)
4 – 5 stalks celery, sliced thinly
3 – 4 carrots, washed and sliced
5 – 7 red potatoes
1 T pepper
2 t salt
1 t salt

Rinse lentils a few times and then add enough water to cover by about an inch or two (more water will make the soup thinner). Let the lentils soak for an hour or two, and then bring to a boil. Turn heat down to a simmer and add canned tomatoes, salt and pepper and bouillon. Sauté the onion and celery over medium heat until the onions are translucent. Add to the soup pot. Add the sliced carrots and chunked potatoes, cut potatoes into smaller pieces if you want to make lentil burgers from leftovers. Cover and let simmer for about an hour over low heat. Stir occasionally and make sure the lentils do not dry out. Season to taste. 

 
  Red Lentil Soup
Cheryl Beesley, author Landscaping with Edible Plants in Texas

1 ½ cups dry red lentils
1 medium onion
1 T stock base (I like to use ‘Better Than Bouillon’ brand)
3 stalks celery, sliced thinly
2 carrots, washed and sliced
3-4 medium-sized red potatoes
½ head small cabbage
2 t pepper
1 t salt

Rinse lentils a few times until water is less milky looking and then add enough water to cover by about an inch or two (more water will make the soup thinner). I like to let my lentils soak for an hour or two, but you don’t have to. They will just take longer to cook and the veggies might be more “mushy” for longer cooking. Bring lentils and soup stock to a boil. Sauté the onion and celery over medium heat until the onions are translucent. Add to the soup pot. Turn heat down to a simmer. Add the sliced carrots and chunked potatoes. Just place finely sliced cabbage over top of soup. Cover and let simmer for about 20-25 minutes over low heat. Stir occasionally and make sure the lentils do not dry out. Season to taste.

 
  Pinto Bean Mole’ Chili
Cheryl Beesley, author Landscaping with Edible Plants in Texas

6 c cooked pinto beans (or 3 – 15 oz. cans)
2 medium dried ancho chiles, wiped clean
1 dried chipotle chili, wiped clean
1 t cumin seed, roasted and cooled
1 t dried oregano
1/8 t cinnamon
3 T olive oil
1 large onion
4-6 cloves garlic, minced
3 medium zucchini, or yellow squash, cut into ½” pieces
1 t grated orange peel
Juice of ½ an orange
1 oz. unsweetened chocolate finely chopped, or 3 T unsweetened cocoa powder
1 small can diced tomatoes
¾ C. water
Salt to taste

For dried beans, rinse beans in cold water and allow to soak during the day. Cook over medium heat cook beans with 2 t salt until soft, about 2 hours. Do not allow beans to dry out. While beans are cooking, slit the chiles lengthwise and stem and seed. Heat a dry, heavy skillet over medium heat until hot, and then toast the chiles, opened flat, turning and pressing until pliable and slightly changed in color, about 30 seconds. Cut into small pieces and combine with cooled cumin seed into a grinder and grind until finely ground. (This will discolor your grinder and give it a very spicy flavor unless you have a grinder specifically for spices, or one that can be washed.) Transfer to a bowl and stir in the oregano, cinnamon and 1 ½ t salt. Sauté the onions in the olive oil until softened, add the garlic and sauté for 1 minute more, then add the chili mixture and cook for an additional 30 seconds. Stir in the squash and cook uncovered for 5 minutes. Add the orange peel, chocolate, canned tomatoes and water and simmer, covered, stirring occasionally until squash is tender, about 15 minutes. Add the beans and salt to taste. Simmer for 5 minutes. 


 
  Split Pea Soup
Cheryl Beesley, author Landscaping with Edible Plants in Texas

1 16-oz package split peas
6 c water
3 T olive oil
1 large yellow onion
3-4 large carrots, sliced
1 ½ T ‘Better than Bullion’ vegetable bullion
Salt 
Pepper

Rinse peas and soak for 1-2 hours (or for the day while you are at work). Sauté onion in olive oil and add to peas and cook over low heat for about 20 minutes. Be careful that the peas do not boil over or dry out. Add carrots and simmer until the carrots are soft, about 20-30 minutes. Salt and pepper to taste.




